     In winter the interior of the university library was hardly
warmer than the outside, and it was terribly drafty.  The sole
difference between the interior and exterior, Gretchen often
remarked to herself, was that the latter received an occasional
snow.  The library at least was dry.  On most days in the
unfrequented areas--the closed stacks on the second and third
floors--one could see one's breath in the middle of the afternoon.
Gretchen thought it hardly the sort of climate she would have
chosen for her own books.  But the cost of heating such an enormous
building--well, she decided she could hardly imagine so extravagant
a sum.  On the coldest days, she often wore two petticoats.  She
found the best method of staying warm, though, was to bustle as
quickly as she could.  Primarily, she worked in the stacks,
extracting books for the library's patrons and reshelving books
that had returned--and keeping the shelves in good order.

     Gretchen's twenty-ninth birthday had arrived--quite too
quickly--the day before, and she bustled with an excess of alacrity
to relieve her mind from the brooding that had occupied her for
several days.  She had spent the evening alone, though she knew
it did her no good to seek solitude.  To accept being past her
prime of life would be simpler perhaps, and productive of less
anguish, than fretting over what could not be changed.  She was
nearly thirty, though--and she knew what lay in store for her a
few years hence.  She had only to look at the assistant reference
librarian, Miss Sadie, to see how she herself would be in but a
few more years.  The thought nearly made her shudder, and if she
allowed herself to think too deeply upon the matter, might have
brought her to tears.  Thankfully, Gretchen told herself, she
could grow old among the books, where at least she had the company
of great minds--or their legacy--rather than spend a life straining
in a factory--or under the yoke of an old-fashioned man.

     She had been estranged from her family for six years and
rarely given them serious thought since fleeing Connecticut.  
A simple enough row it had been to start--what should she do now
that she had finished university?  Of course her father recommended
marriage and settling into the domestic life--a pretty girl like
her.  Him and his antiquated ideals--a pretty girl in the kitchen,
indeed!  At twenty-three she had finally come to her senses and
refused to marry the young man to whom she had been betrothed,
no matter how well matched her father thought they were.

     Her mother had frequently confided to Gretchen her views on
the varied pleasures--and trials--inherent in marriage, admitting
that as the years passed she found the pleasures perhaps not
worth the other hardships--the outward subjugation of her own
feelings and the constant deference she was required to display
within the confines of that marriage, as if she had no independent
mind.  Gretchen had long since determined that would not be her
fate.  She had come to believe that no suitable man could be
found, yet she remained unsatisfied.  The only true regret she
had about casting off her family ties was that she had disappointed
her mother.  It was her mother who had worked so hard, really,
to see that Gretchen had an education; her father only begrudgingly
went along for the sake of domestic tranquility when all efforts
to dissuade her had failed.

     At university Gretchen had imbibed the rarefied intellectual
atmosphere with increasing eagerness and found herself drawn
irresistibly up the slopes of Parnassus.  She had always intended
to work after completing university--and work she did, though
she had difficulty making due with what employment she could
find.  Even a superlative education, she had learned in six years,
did not buy one certain rights or reasonable wages.  She hoped
that she would yet see the flowering of an age that she could
call an enlightened one.  She might have been bitter had she
higher material aspirations, but she was content with little in
the way of physical comforts.  Why the privilege of spending
nearly all her days in the library would have been worth almost
any sacrifice--what need had she of wages!

     It was lamentable, she decided, that she should have to
forgo marital companionship if she were to retain her
individuality--for the price of her freedom was a monumental
sort of loneliness that only the severest mental discipline could
overcome.  She had seen so many of her school friends smothered
in the clutches of bad marriages, worn out beneath their husbands'
heels--almost like doormats.  To be truthful there were those
who seemed to prosper in the state of matrimony, but she thought
them few.  Yet, she still had an abiding fear that she would grow
old alone--and soon enough become as obdurate as Miss Sadie--
a pitiable spinster with none of the finer sensibilities left to
her.  Was there no man, Gretchen wondered, with whom she could
share her life and interests--a man with progressive ideas?
Not a man that she, like a tiny moon, would orbit eternally,
but one with whom she could find a state of mutual orbit.  Well,
she thought, something of that nature anyway.  Her knowledge of
astronomy was not up to the task of finding a better analogy,
and she resolved to remedy that as soon as she was able.  
She added another volume--'something concerning the heavens' she
called it--to the list of books she thought she really must read.
